README.md, before:

# Mantic Early Warning System

Cross-domain anomaly and opportunity detection using 4-layer hierarchical analysis. 
Compatible with Claude, Kimi, Gemini, Codex, and GPT-4o.

**14 tools total:** 7 Friction (divergence detection) + 7 Emergence (confluence detection)

## Core Formula (Immutable)

```
M = (sum(W * L * I)) * f(t) / k_n
```

## Tool Suites

### Friction Tools (Divergence Detection)
Detects when layers diverge: `if abs(L1 - L2) > 0.5: alert()`

| Tool | Domain | Description |
|------|--------|-------------|
| `healthcare_phenotype_genotype` | Healthcare | Phenotype-genotype mismatch |
| `finance_regime_conflict` | Finance | Market regime conflicts |
| `cyber_attribution_resolver` | Cyber | Attribution uncertainty |
| `climate_maladaptation` | Climate | Maladaptation prevention |
| `legal_precedent_drift` | Legal | Precedent drift alert |
| `military_friction_forecast` | Military | Operational friction |
| `social_narrative_rupture` | Social | Narrative rupture detection |

### Emergence Tools (Confluence Detection)
Detects when layers align: `if min(L) > 0.6: window_detected()`

| Tool | Domain | Description |
|------|--------|-------------|
| `healthcare_precision_therapeutic` | Healthcare | Optimal treatment windows |
| `finance_confluence_alpha` | Finance | High-conviction setups |
| `cyber_adversary_overreach` | Cyber | Defensive advantage windows |
| `climate_resilience_multiplier` | Climate | Multi-benefit interventions |
| `legal_precedent_seeding` | Legal | Precedent-setting windows |
| `military_strategic_initiative` | Military | Decisive action windows |
| `social_catalytic_alignment` | Social | Movement-building windows |

## Installation

```bash
cd mantic-tools
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Quick Start

### Native Python

```python
# Friction tool (detect risk)
from tools.friction.healthcare_phenotype_genotype import detect as detect_friction
result = detect_friction(phenotypic=0.3, genomic=0.9, environmental=0.4, psychosocial=0.8)
print(f"Alert: {result['alert']}")  # Warning about mismatch

# Emergence tool (detect opportunity)
from tools.emergence.healthcare_precision_therapeutic import detect as detect_emergence
result = detect_emergence(genomic_predisposition=0.85, environmental_readiness=0.82,
                          phenotypic_timing=0.88, psychosocial_engagement=0.90)
print(f"Window: {result['window_detected']}")  # True - optimal timing
```

### For Kimi Code CLI

```python
from adapters.kimi_adapter import get_kimi_tools, execute, compare_friction_emergence

# Get all 14 tools
tools = get_kimi_tools()

# Compare friction vs emergence for same domain
comparison = compare_friction_emergence(
    "healthcare",
    friction_params={"phenotypic": 0.3, "genomic": 0.9, "environmental": 0.4, "psychosocial": 0.8},
    emergence_params={"genomic_predisposition": 0.85, "environmental_readiness": 0.82,
                     "phenotypic_timing": 0.88, "psychosocial_engagement": 0.90}
)
# High M in friction = risk. High M in emergence = opportunity.
```

### For Claude Code CLI

```python
from adapters.claude_adapter import get_claude_tools, execute_tool, format_for_claude

# Get 14 tools in Computer Use format
tools = get_claude_tools()

# Execute and format for Claude
result = execute_tool("finance_confluence_alpha", {
    "technical_setup": 0.85, "macro_tailwind": 0.80,
    "flow_positioning": 0.75, "risk_compression": 0.70
})
print(format_for_claude(result, "finance_confluence_alpha"))
```

### For Gemini

```python
from adapters.gemini_adapter import get_gemini_tools, execute_tool

# Get tools in Gemini FunctionDeclaration format
tools = get_gemini_tools()

# Or get flat list for simpler SDK usage
from adapters.gemini_adapter import get_gemini_tools_flat
declarations = get_gemini_tools_flat()

result = execute_tool("climate_resilience_multiplier", {
    "atmospheric_benefit": 0.75, "ecological_benefit": 0.80,
    "infrastructure_benefit": 0.78, "policy_alignment": 0.82
})
```

### For Ollama (MiniMax, GPT-OSS, GLM, etc.)

```python
from adapters.openai_adapter import get_openai_tools, execute_tool
import openai

# Ollama's OpenAI-compatible endpoint
client = openai.OpenAI(
    base_url="http://localhost:11434/v1",
    api_key="ollama"
)

tools = get_openai_tools()
# Works with: minimax-m2.1:cloud, gpt-oss:20b-cloud, glm-4.7:cloud, etc.
```

### For Codex / OpenAI

```python
from adapters.openai_adapter import get_openai_tools, execute_tool, get_tools_by_type

# Get all 14 tools
tools = get_openai_tools()

# Or filter by type
friction = get_tools_by_type("friction")   # 7 tools
emergence = get_tools_by_type("emergence") # 7 tools

result = execute_tool("cyber_adversary_overreach", {
    "threat_intel_stretch": 0.90, "geopolitical_pressure": 0.85,
    "operational_hardening": 0.80, "tool_reuse_fatigue": 0.88
})
```

## Architecture

```
mantic-tools/
├── SKILL.md                    # Universal manifest
├── README.md                   # This file
├── schemas/
│   ├── openapi.json           # OpenAPI spec
│   └── kimi-tools.json        # Kimi native format
├── core/
│   ├── mantic_kernel.py       # IMMUTABLE core formula
│   └── validators.py          # Input validation
├── tools/
│   ├── friction/              # 7 divergence detection tools
│   └── emergence/             # 7 confluence detection tools
├── adapters/                  # Model-specific adapters (Claude/Kimi/Gemini/OpenAI)
├── configs/                   # Domain configurations & framework docs
│   ├── mantic_tech_spec.md    # Technical specification
│   ├── mantic_explicit_framework.md  # Framework protocol
│   ├── mantic_health.md       # Healthcare domain config
│   ├── mantic_finance.md      # Finance domain config
│   └── ...                    # (8 domain configs total)
└── tests/                     # Cross-model validation
```

## Running Tests

```bash
# Quick sanity check
python3 -c "from adapters.openai_adapter import get_openai_tools; print(len(get_openai_tools()), 'tools ready')"

# Run all tests
python3 -m pytest tests/test_cross_model.py -v

# Test individual tool
python3 tools/emergence/healthcare_precision_therapeutic.py
```

## Key Principle: Same M-Score, Opposite Meaning

| M-Score | Friction (Risk) | Emergence (Opportunity) |
|---------|-----------------|------------------------|
| 0.1-0.3 | Low risk ✓ | Low opportunity (wait) |
| 0.4-0.6 | Moderate friction ⚠️ | Favorable window |
| 0.7-0.9 | High risk 🚨 | Optimal window 🎯 |

The M-score measures **intensity**. Friction tools interpret high intensity as danger. Emergence tools interpret high intensity as opportunity.

## Configuration Files

The `configs/` directory contains framework documentation and domain-specific configurations:

- **Framework docs**: Technical specification, explicit framework mode, reasoning guidelines
- **Domain configs**: Healthcare, Finance, Cybersecurity, Climate, Legal, Social, Command, Current Affairs

These provide layer mappings and cross-domain coupling patterns for implementing domain-specific tools.

## Design Principles

1. **Immutable Core**: `mantic_kernel.py` must not be modified
2. **Deterministic**: Same inputs always return same outputs
3. **No External APIs**: Pure Python + NumPy only
4. **Cross-Model Compatible**: Works with Claude, Kimi, Codex, GPT-4o
5. **Complementary Suites**: Friction for risks, Emergence for opportunities
6. **Simple Logic**: Each tool <100 lines, threshold-based

## License

MIT License

## Version

1.0.0 - Complete suite with 14 cross-model compatible tools

Commit message:

Add licensing docs, packaging config, and schema tests

README.md, after:

# Mantic Early Warning System

Cross-domain anomaly and opportunity detection using 4-layer hierarchical analysis. 
Compatible with Claude, Kimi, Gemini, Codex, and GPT-4o.

**14 tools total:** 7 Friction (divergence detection) + 7 Emergence (confluence detection)

## Core Formula (Immutable)

```
M = (sum(W * L * I)) * f(t) / k_n
```

## Tool Suites

### Friction Tools (Divergence Detection)
Detects when layers diverge: `if abs(L1 - L2) > 0.5: alert()`

| Tool | Domain | Description |
|------|--------|-------------|
| `healthcare_phenotype_genotype` | Healthcare | Phenotype-genotype mismatch |
| `finance_regime_conflict` | Finance | Market regime conflicts |
| `cyber_attribution_resolver` | Cyber | Attribution uncertainty |
| `climate_maladaptation` | Climate | Maladaptation prevention |
| `legal_precedent_drift` | Legal | Precedent drift alert |
| `military_friction_forecast` | Military | Operational friction |
| `social_narrative_rupture` | Social | Narrative rupture detection |

### Emergence Tools (Confluence Detection)
Detects when layers align: `if min(L) > 0.6: window_detected()`

| Tool | Domain | Description |
|------|--------|-------------|
| `healthcare_precision_therapeutic` | Healthcare | Optimal treatment windows |
| `finance_confluence_alpha` | Finance | High-conviction setups |
| `cyber_adversary_overreach` | Cyber | Defensive advantage windows |
| `climate_resilience_multiplier` | Climate | Multi-benefit interventions |
| `legal_precedent_seeding` | Legal | Precedent-setting windows |
| `military_strategic_initiative` | Military | Decisive action windows |
| `social_catalytic_alignment` | Social | Movement-building windows |

## Installation

```bash
cd mantic-tools
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Quick Start

### Native Python

```python
# Friction tool (detect risk)
from tools.friction.healthcare_phenotype_genotype import detect as detect_friction
result = detect_friction(phenotypic=0.3, genomic=0.9, environmental=0.4, psychosocial=0.8)
print(f"Alert: {result['alert']}")  # Warning about mismatch

# Emergence tool (detect opportunity)
from tools.emergence.healthcare_precision_therapeutic import detect as detect_emergence
result = detect_emergence(genomic_predisposition=0.85, environmental_readiness=0.82,
                          phenotypic_timing=0.88, psychosocial_engagement=0.90)
print(f"Window: {result['window_detected']}")  # True - optimal timing
```

### For Kimi Code CLI

```python
from adapters.kimi_adapter import get_kimi_tools, execute, compare_friction_emergence

# Get all 14 tools
tools = get_kimi_tools()

# Compare friction vs emergence for same domain
comparison = compare_friction_emergence(
    "healthcare",
    friction_params={"phenotypic": 0.3, "genomic": 0.9, "environmental": 0.4, "psychosocial": 0.8},
    emergence_params={"genomic_predisposition": 0.85, "environmental_readiness": 0.82,
                     "phenotypic_timing": 0.88, "psychosocial_engagement": 0.90}
)
# High M in friction = risk. High M in emergence = opportunity.
```

### For Claude Code CLI

```python
from adapters.claude_adapter import get_claude_tools, execute_tool, format_for_claude

# Get 14 tools in Computer Use format
tools = get_claude_tools()

# Execute and format for Claude
result = execute_tool("finance_confluence_alpha", {
    "technical_setup": 0.85, "macro_tailwind": 0.80,
    "flow_positioning": 0.75, "risk_compression": 0.70
})
print(format_for_claude(result, "finance_confluence_alpha"))
```

### For Gemini

```python
from adapters.gemini_adapter import get_gemini_tools, execute_tool

# Get tools in Gemini FunctionDeclaration format
tools = get_gemini_tools()

# Or get flat list for simpler SDK usage
from adapters.gemini_adapter import get_gemini_tools_flat
declarations = get_gemini_tools_flat()

result = execute_tool("climate_resilience_multiplier", {
    "atmospheric_benefit": 0.75, "ecological_benefit": 0.80,
    "infrastructure_benefit": 0.78, "policy_alignment": 0.82
})
```

### For Ollama (MiniMax, GPT-OSS, GLM, etc.)

```python
from adapters.openai_adapter import get_openai_tools, execute_tool
import openai

# Ollama's OpenAI-compatible endpoint
client = openai.OpenAI(
    base_url="http://localhost:11434/v1",
    api_key="ollama"
)

tools = get_openai_tools()
# Works with: minimax-m2.1:cloud, gpt-oss:20b-cloud, glm-4.7:cloud, etc.
```

### For Codex / OpenAI

```python
from adapters.openai_adapter import get_openai_tools, execute_tool, get_tools_by_type

# Get all 14 tools
tools = get_openai_tools()

# Or filter by type
friction = get_tools_by_type("friction")   # 7 tools
emergence = get_tools_by_type("emergence") # 7 tools

result = execute_tool("cyber_adversary_overreach", {
    "threat_intel_stretch": 0.90, "geopolitical_pressure": 0.85,
    "operational_hardening": 0.80, "tool_reuse_fatigue": 0.88
})
```

## Architecture

```
mantic-tools/
├── SKILL.md                    # Universal manifest
├── README.md                   # This file
├── schemas/
│   ├── openapi.json           # OpenAPI spec
│   └── kimi-tools.json        # Kimi native format
├── core/
│   ├── mantic_kernel.py       # IMMUTABLE core formula
│   └── validators.py          # Input validation
├── tools/
│   ├── friction/              # 7 divergence detection tools
│   └── emergence/             # 7 confluence detection tools
├── adapters/                  # Model-specific adapters (Claude/Kimi/Gemini/OpenAI)
├── configs/                   # Domain configurations & framework docs
│   ├── mantic_tech_spec.md    # Technical specification
│   ├── mantic_explicit_framework.md  # Framework protocol
│   ├── mantic_health.md       # Healthcare domain config
│   ├── mantic_finance.md      # Finance domain config
│   └── ...                    # (8 domain configs total)
└── tests/                     # Cross-model validation
```

## Running Tests

```bash
# Quick sanity check
python3 -c "from adapters.openai_adapter import get_openai_tools; print(len(get_openai_tools()), 'tools ready')"

# Run all tests
python3 -m pytest tests/test_cross_model.py -v

# Test individual tool
python3 tools/emergence/healthcare_precision_therapeutic.py
```

## Key Principle: Same M-Score, Opposite Meaning

| M-Score | Friction (Risk) | Emergence (Opportunity) |
|---------|-----------------|------------------------|
| 0.1-0.3 | Low risk ✓ | Low opportunity (wait) |
| 0.4-0.6 | Moderate friction ⚠️ | Favorable window |
| 0.7-0.9 | High risk 🚨 | Optimal window 🎯 |

The M-score measures **intensity**. Friction tools interpret high intensity as danger. Emergence tools interpret high intensity as opportunity.

## Configuration Files

The `configs/` directory contains framework documentation and domain-specific configurations:

- **Framework docs**: Technical specification, explicit framework mode, reasoning guidelines
- **Domain configs**: Healthcare, Finance, Cybersecurity, Climate, Legal, Social, Command, Current Affairs

These provide layer mappings and cross-domain coupling patterns for implementing domain-specific tools.

## Design Principles

1. **Immutable Core**: `mantic_kernel.py` must not be modified
2. **Deterministic**: Same inputs always return same outputs
3. **No External APIs**: Pure Python + NumPy only
4. **Cross-Model Compatible**: Works with Claude, Kimi, Codex, GPT-4o
5. **Complementary Suites**: Friction for risks, Emergence for opportunities
6. **Simple Logic**: Each tool <100 lines, threshold-based

## License

### Source-Available License (Default)

Elastic License 2.0 — See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for full text.

**tl;dr:**
- ✅ Free to use, modify, distribute for internal applications
- ✅ Can use in production for your own organization
- ❌ **Cannot** offer as a hosted/managed service (SaaS)
- ❌ **Cannot** embed in commercial products without commercial license
- ❌ **Cannot** remove license protections

### Commercial License

Want to build a SaaS on top of Mantic? Embed it in your product? Redistribute?

**Purchase a commercial license** — See [COMMERCIAL_LICENSE](COMMERCIAL_LICENSE) for pricing and terms.

| Tier | Best For | From |
|------|----------|------|
| Startup | <$1M revenue, internal use | $500/year |
| Growth | <$50M revenue, internal use | $5,000/year |
| Enterprise | Unlimited internal, large orgs | $25,000/year |
| OEM/SaaS | Embed, resell, offer as service | Custom (from $50k) |

**Contact:** licensing@manticthink.com

*All licenses include updates and email support. OEM includes custom development options.*

## Version

1.0.0 - Complete suite with 14 cross-model compatible tools
